_2021-01-27 : Suggest Control_

# OPTIONS Control Working Document


## Summary
The need for a `HTML.SELECT`-type control for **HAL-FORMS** has been clear for quite a while. After several excellent attempts, this is an effort aimed at knocking out a workable solution ASAP. It might not meet all needs right away, but hopefully it is useful and, if needed, can be expanded down the line.

The hope is that we can commit an acceptable version of this feature with the next several days.

This doc is here to allow people to review and comment on the initial design. 

**NOTE: This latest edition incorporates feedback from https://github.com/mamund/hal-forms/issues/9 **

### Background Material
Various design options have been offered for this UI element. Below is a list of some of the background material used in creating this design:

 * Github issue: https://github.com/mamund/hal-forms/issues/9
 * Additional considerations: https://gist.github.com/odrotbohm/6edb70220950b3d474092be13989efe7
 * WeSTL Suggest: http://rwcbook.github.io/wstl-spec/#_suggest_arrays

### Proposed **HAL-FORMS** OPTIONS
The motivation for the control is to provide an enumerated list of possible values for a `property`. This can be used to provide a UI similar to HTML controls such as 

 * `SELECT & OPTIONS`
 * `INPUT.type="radio"`
 * `INPUT.type="checkbox"`
 * `INPUT.type="search"` (w/ type-ahead suggestions)

#### General Functionality
The `options` object is a child of `property`. It contains a set of possible values accessible either byValue (e.g. `inline`) or byReference (e.g. via `resource.href`). The `options` control can be rendered as a fixed dropdown list (`type="dropdown"`), a set of radio buttons (`type="radio"`), a series of checkboxes (`type=checkbox"`), or as an open field that supports type-ahead autocompletion (`type="search"`). 

If the **HAL-FORMS** template has a pre-set value in the corresponding `property.options.values` array attribute, the UI MAY render the form with pre-selected value(s) already chosen.

Whatever value is ultimately selected gets placed into the `property.options.values` array attribute. When sending the results of the completed **HAL-FORMS** to the server, content `property.options.values` is serialized in a manner compliant with the media type value in the `contentType` attribute (e.g. `appilcation/json`, `application/x-www-form-urlencded`, etc.).

#### Skeleton Design for OPTIONS Object
To start, here is the complete design for the **HAL-FORMS** `property.options` control. Details describing the meaning and use of all the elements of the design appears in the sections that follow.

```javascript
{
  "_templates" : {
    "default" : {
      ...
      "contentType" : "application/json|application/x-www-form-ulencoded",
      "properties" : [
        {
          "name" : "...", 
          "prompt" : "...", 
          "options" : {
            "values" : ["...", "...", ...], 
            "inline" : ["...", "..." , ...] | [{"prompt" : "...", "value" : "..."}, {...}, ...],
            "resource" : {
              "href" : "...",
              "templated" : "true|false",
              "accept" : "application/json|text/csv..."
            },
            "promptField" : "...",
            "valueField" : "...",
            "minSelect" : "0",
            "maxSelect" : "1",
            "autocomplete" : "true|false"          
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

Not all the elements of the `options` object shown above are valid at the same time. There are a number of possible "renditions" of the `options` object. This spec covers the following:

 * OPTIONS with a Simple Inline Array of Values
 * OPTIONS with an Inline Array of Name/Value Pairs
 * OPTIONS with an External Array of Values
 * OPTIONS with an External Array of Name/Value Pairs
 * OPTIONS with Reference Fields
 * OPTIONS with Multiple Return Values
 * OPTIONS with Type-Ahead/Auto-Completion Support

#### OPTIONS with a Simple Inline Array of Values
Below is a simple rendition of the `options` control using the _Inline Array_ style.  Note that, in the example below control's default value would be set to "FedEx".

```javascript
{
  "_templates" : {
    "default" : {
      ...
      "properties" : [
        {
          "name" : "shipping", 
          "prompt" : "Select Shipping Method", 
          "options" : {
            "values" : ["FedEx"],
            "inline" : ["FedEx","UPS","DHL"]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

A corresponding `HTML.SELECT` rendering looks like this:

```html
<label for="shipping">Select Shipping Method</label>
<select name="shipping">
  <option selected="true">FedEx</option>
  <option>UPS</option>
  <option>DHL</option>
</select>
```

#### OPTIONS with an Inline Array of Name/Value Pairs
Below is an example of the `options` control using an _Inline Array of Name/Value Paris_.

```javascript
{
  "_templates" : {
    "default" : {
      ...
      "properties" : [
        {
          "name" : "shipping", 
          "type" : "radio",
          "prompt" : "Select Shipping Method", 
          "options" : {
            "values" : ["FedEx"],
            "inline" : [
              {"prompt" : "Federal Express", "value" : "FedEx"},
              {"prompt" : "United Parcel Service", "value" : "UPS"},
              {"prompt" : "DHL Express", "value" : "DHL"}
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

A corresponding `HTML.INPUT.type="radio"` rendering looks like this:

```html
<p>
  <input type="radio" id="fedex" name="shipping" value="FedEx" checked="true">
  <label for="fedex">Federal Express</label><br>
  
  <input type="radio" id="ups" name="shipping" value="UPS">
  <label for="ups">United Parcel Service</label><br>
  
  <input type="radio" id="dhl" name="shipping" value="DHL">
  <label for="dhl">DHL Express</label>
</p>
```

#### OPTIONS with an External Array of Values
The source of possible values for a `options` control can also be an external resource. This resource is reachable using an `HTML.GET` against a supplied URL (which MAY be templated) and and OPTIONAL `accept` property that holds a valid registered media type (e.g. `text/csv`, `application/json`, etc.). 

By default, the response value is a _Simple Array_ rendered in `application/json` as simple JSON array.

```javascript
{
  "_templates" : {
    "default" : {
      ...
      "properties" : [
        {
          "name" : "shipping", 
          "type" : "radio",
          "prompt" : "Select Shipping Method", 
          "options" : {
            "values" : ["FedEx"],
            "resource" : {
              "href" : "http://api.examples.org/shipping-options",
              "templated" : "false",
              "accept" : "application/json"
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

The client would dereference the URL using `HTTP.GET`. The exchange (including the response) looks like this:

```
*** REQUEST
GET /shipping-options HTTP/2.0
Host: api.example.org
Accept: application/json

*** RESPONSE
HTTP/2.0 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Content-Length: nn

["Fedex","UPS","DHL"]
```

A CR-LF delimited set of values MAY be returned if the `options.accept` attribute is set to `text/csv`

```
*** REQUEST
GET /shipping-options HTTP/2.0
Host: api.example.org
Accept: text/csv

*** RESPONSE
HTTP/2.0 200 OK
Content-Type: text/csv
Content-Length: nn

Fedex
UPS
DHL
```

**NOTE**: If the client cannot dereference the supplied URL and/or cannot parse the response body, the client SHOULD consider the `options` control invalid and treat it as a simple `text` input.


#### OPTIONS with an External Array of Name/Value Pairs
The external resource MAY return a collection of name/value pairs.

```javascript
{
  "_templates" : {
    "default" : {
      ...
      "properties" : [
        {
          "name" : "shipping", 
          "type" : "dropdown",
          "prompt" : "Select Shipping Method", 
          "options" : {
            "values" : ["FedEx"],
            "resource" : {
              "href" : "http://api.examples.org/shipping-options",
              "templated" : "false",
              "accept : "application/json"
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

The client would dereference the URL using `HTTP.GET`. The exchange (including the response) looks like this:

```
*** REQUEST
GET /shipping-options HTTP/2.0
Host: api.example.org
Accept: application/json

*** RESPONSE
HTTP/2.0 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Content-Length: nn

[
  {"prompt" : "Federal Express", "value" : "FedEx"},
  {"prompt" : "United Parcel Service", "value" : "UPS"},
  {"prompt" : "DHL Express", "value" : "DHL"}
]
```

The set of name/value pairs MAY be returned in `text/csv` format when the `options.accept` property is set to `text/csv`.


```
*** REQUEST
GET /shipping-options HTTP/2.0
Host: api.example.org
Accept: text/csv

*** RESPONSE
HTTP/2.0 200 OK
Content-Type: text/csv
Content-Length: nn

Federal Express,FedEx
United Parcel Service,UPS
DHL Express,DHL
```

**NOTE**: If the client cannot dereference to supplied URL and/or cannot parse the response body, the client SHOULD consider the `options` control invalid and treat it as a simple `text` input.

#### OPTIONS with Reference Fields
The `options` element also supports the use of `options.promptField` and `options.valueField` as custom property names  or _Reference Fields_ instead of using the default names `"prompt"` and `"value"`.  In this case, the `promptField` value contains the name of the field in the source collection (`inline` or `resource`) to be used for prompts and the `valueField` value contains the name of the field in the source collection to be used for values.

```javascript
{
  "_templates" : {
    "default" : {
      ...
      "properties" : [
        {
          "name" : "shipping", 
          "type" : "radio",
          "prompt" : "Select Shipping Method", 
          "options" : {
            "values" : ["FedEx"],
            "inline" : [
              {"shipName" : "Federal Express", "shipCode" : "FedEx"},
              {"shipName" : "United Parcel Service", "shipCode" : "UPS"},
              {"shipName" : "DHL Express", "shipCode" : "DHL"}
            ],
            "promptField" : "shipName",
            "valueField" : "shipCode"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

_Reference Fields_ MAY be used when returning an array of JSON objects if the `options.accept` attribute is set to `application/json`

```
*** REQUEST
GET /shipping-options HTTP/2.0
Host: api.example.org
Accept: application/json

*** RESPONSE
HTTP/2.0 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Content-Length: nn

[
  {"shipName" : "Federal Express", "shipCode" : "FedEx"},
  {"shipName" : "United Parcel Service", "shipCode" : "UPS"},
  {"shipName" : "DHL Express", "shipCode" : "DHL"}
]
```
**NOTE**: If the client cannot locate the `promptField` and/or `valueField` elements with the collection of possible values, the client SHOULD consider the `options` object invalid and SHOULD treat the `property` element as a simple `text` input.

#### OPTIONS with Multiple Return Values
You can signal the minimum and maximum number of items that can be selected using the `options.minSelect` and `options.maxSelect` attributes. By default, these attributes are `options.minSelect=0` an `options.maxSelect=1`. Client applications SHOULD validate the number of seleted values using these attributes. This can apply whether the source list comes from `inline` or `resource`. These attributes are OPTIONAL and MAY be ignored by the client.


```javascript
{
  "_templates" : {
    "default" : {
      ...
      "properties" : [
        {
          "name" : "shipping", 
          "type" : "checkbox",
          "prompt" : "Select Shipping Method", 
          "suggest" : {
            "values" : ["FedEx"],
            "inline" : [
              {"shipName" : "Federal Express", "shipCode" : "FedEx"},
              {"shipName" : "United Parcel Service", "shipCode" : "UPS"},
              {"shipName" : "DHL Express", "shipCode" : "DHL"}
            ],
            "minSelect" : "1",
            "maxSelect" : "2"
            "promptField" : "shipName",
            "valueField" : "shipCode"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

When sending the results of selecting multiple values from the `options` collection from the client to the server, the rules associated with the `contentType` SHOULD be applied.  When the `contentType` is set to `application/json`, the contents of the `options.values` array SHOULD be serialized as a simple JSON array:

```
{
  ...
  shipping=["FedEx", "DHL"]
  ...
}
```

When the `contentType` is set to `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`, the contents of the `options.values` array SHOULD be serialized as a set of repeating name/value pairs:

```
shipping=FedEx&shipping=DHL
```

#### OPTIONS with Type-Ahead/Auto-Completion Support
The the `options.autocomplete` attribute is set to "`true`, the client MAY use the `options` element to offer a type-ahead or auto-complete UI experience. Typically, the `autocomplete` attribute is set to `true`  when the possible value collection is supplied via the `options.resource` object. In this case, client applications SHOULD use the URL template supplied within the HAL-FORMS document to send filtering data to the remote resource (via `HTML.GET`). The `autocomplete` attribute is OPTIONAL and MAY be ignored by the client application.

```javascript
{
  "_templates" : {
    "default" : {
      ...
      "properties" : [
        {
          "name" : "shipping", 
          "type" : "search",
          "prompt" : "Select Shipping Method", 
          "suggest" : {
            "values" : ["FedEx"],
            "resource" : {
              "href" : "http://api.examples.org/shipping-options{?value},
              "templated" : "true",
              "accept : "application/json",
              "autocomplete" : "true"
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

The resulting response body SHOULD be a shorter list of possible values filtered by the value passed in the URL.

### Other Considerations

 * If the `options` object has no `inline` and no `resource` properties, the `options` object is invalid and SHOULD be treated as simple `text` input.

 * Support for the `options` object of a `property` element is OPTIONAL. If the client does not understand or cannot parse the `options` object, the `suggest` object SHOULD be ignored and the corresponding `property` SHOULD be treated as a simple text input element.

 * While the `options` element of a `property` is commonly associated with UI controls such as dropdown lists, checkboxes, and radio buttons, in **HAL-FORMS** the `options` object MAY appear on any `property` element, even when the `property.type` is set to something other than `select`, `radio`, `checkbox`, or `search`. In these cases, it is up to the client application to determine if and in what manner the the `options` object will be rendered.

 * If both `inline` and `resource` elements appear in the same `options` object, the `inline` element SHOULD be used and the `resource` element SHOULD NOT be used.

 * In cases where the possible value collection only supplies a list of `value` elements, the client SHOULD operate as if a `prompt` element was supplied and set that `prompt` value to equal the contents of the corresponding `value` element.
 
 * Compliant applications SHOULD support both `application/json` and `text/csv` as valid response types for `options.resource` implementations. Clients MAY support other values. If no `options.accept` attribute exists, the client application SHOULD default to `application/json`. Whether the `options.accept` value appears or not, client applications SHOULD send an `Accept` header when making a request to the server with the supplied URL. If no `Accept` header is sent by the client, the server SHOULD assume the client expects an `Accept` header set to `application/json` and respond accordingly.
 
 * When responding to a `resource.href` request, the server MAY return additional fields (e.g. more than `prompt` and `value` fields). Additional fields SHOULD be ignored by the client application.
 
 * When no `autocomplete` attribute is supplied, the client SHOULD assume the `autocomplete` value is set to `false`.
 
 * When no `minSelect` attribute is supplied, the client SHOULD assume the `minSelect` value is set to `0`. When no `maxSelect` attribute is supplied, the client SHOULD assume the `maxSelect` value is set to `1`. Document authors need to take care that `property.required` and `property.options.minSelect` values do not conflict (e.g. `property.required=true` and `options.minSelect=`0`). 
 
## References

 * "Javascript Object Notation" : https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8259
 * "Comma-Seprated Value Files" : https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4180
 * "Form URL-Encoded Payload" : https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/x-www-form-urlencoded


